How do vaccines work?
To understand how vaccines work,
let’s first go over how your body’s immune system works.
When a germ like a virus or bacteria enters your body,
your immune system recognizes there is an invader
and sets off a complex chain of events.
White blood cells in your immune system activate
and start making proteins called antibodies.
Antibodies go to work
to destroy the virus or bacteria.
Often, in the time it takes your immune system
to create the specific antibody to destroy the germ,
you experience some symptoms and feel sick.
But by destroying the virus or bacteria,
your immune system and its antibodies help stop the infection
and can eventually help you feel well again.
Antibodies are unique
and are specific to different viruses and bacteria.
Your immune system remembers the viruses
and bacteria that made you sick.
That way, the next time you are exposed
to the same virus or bacteria,
your immune system quickly activates the antibodies
already in your system and destroys the virus or bacteria
before it even has a chance to make you sick.
Vaccines work by training your immune system
to recognize specific viruses or bacteria and how to fight them.
Vaccines are made using killed or weakened versions of the virus or bacteria
or parts of the virus or bacteria called antigens.
When you get a vaccine,
your immune system recognizes the invader.
Your immune system responds by making antibodies
to the germ in the vaccine
the same as it would for the real virus or bacteria.
Your immune system remembers this virus or bacteria
and now has the antibodies to destroy it.
If you are exposed to the germ in the future,
your immune system has the antibodies
and will be able to quickly destroy the virus or bacteria
before it makes you sick.
It takes time to develop safe and effective vaccines.
Vaccine development and testing
typically follows a standard set of steps.
Early steps are exploratory
and involve researching and identifying parts
of a new virus or bacteria responsible for making you sick.
Researchers develop these substances into vaccine candidates.
Vaccines are evaluated through pre-clinical and
clinical studies to determine the safety and effectiveness.
There are three phases of a clinical trial.
Through each phase the vaccine needs to show it’s safe,
leads to a good immune response,
and provides protection against the virus or bacteria.